---
title: Australian Media’s Obsession with “Overpopulation”
date: 2019-12-29
published: true
author: Dan Henri
tags: ['Politics', 'Fascism', 'Australia']
cover_image: ./images/2_australia-overpopulation.jpg
canonical_url: false
description: Australian media regularly uses discusses overpopulation of the country. It's often a way to promote restrictions on immigration policy and indirectly make cultural critiques of immigrant populations.
---

As a result of the Christchurch shooting—in which an Australian citizen killed 51 people and injured another 49—as well as the El Paso shooting, eco-fascism is now being discussed in Australia. A common link between both shooters was their concern that increased in (non-white) population was harming the environment. In their minds, the solution to this was to murder scores of racialised minorities. This melding of nationalistic racial vilification and violence with environmental concerns is eco-fascism. It is on its face an immoral, illogical and dangerous ideology; it is fascism, after all.

Much of the discussion around the “rise” in eco-fascism focusses on its links to Nazi ideology, or on the radical eco-fascist groups on social media. These things aren’t unimportant, but what’s not being discussed, outside of some smaller publications, is that Australian political discourse is basically pickling in Malthusian talking points about overpopulation which aim to make the case against immigration and create a sense of fear around foreign-ness. These arguments often take the form of explicit eco-fascism when found in obsentibly left-wing publications—which attempt to pander to the audience’s perceived concern about the environment—while focussing more on the strain on Australia’s infrastructure and population density, as well as bread-and-butter nationalistic racism in more centrist and right-wing publications.

The literary journal Meanjin published a [piece](https://meanjin.com.au/blog/the-elephant-in-the-chamber/) by Paul Spinks in June 2018 which complained that the issue of “overpopulation” (almost always code for immigration in Australia) was never brought up at climate rallies, which tend to favor attacking the fossil fuel industry, and goes on to make the case that in order to protect our environment, we need to drastically cut immigration. In this piece Spinks also hand-waves away claims of racism, while later on employing a misguided and racist trope by idealising Japan as a strictly monocultural society with next to no immigration. This trope is an inaccurate racial fetishisation of a society often employed by people with no actual knowledge of Japan. In attempting to erase the diversity which already exists in Japan and gloss over any societal problems to make the case for racial homogeneity. For this reason it’s [very popular with white supremacists and Nazis](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/01/06/opinion/sunday/alt-right-asian-fetish.html) such as Richard Spencer, who advocate for ethnic cleansing of the United States. In May 2019, [another piece](https://newmatilda.com/2019/05/16/the-green-blind-spot-on-australias-expanding-population/) by Spinks was published in New Matilda, making the same Malthusian claims in an attempt to whip up paranoia around immigration and its threat to the environment.

Independent Australia, a website which describes itself as a “progressive journal”, seems to publish a piece very concerned with “population” about every month. In March 2018, they published a piece by Geoff Davies titled “[Big Australia and bust: Immigration is a drag on our economy and lifestyle](https://independentaustralia.net/politics/politics-display/immigration-is-a-drag-on-the-economy--and-our-lifestyle,11299)” which makes the case that immigrants are a straining Australian infrastructure and undercut wages of those born in Australia. A piece published in November 2019 by Suresh Rajan titled “[‘Region’ of Perth not so cheerful about increased migration](https://independentaustralia.net/politics/politics-display/region-of-perth-not-so-cheerful-about-increased-migration-,13278)” argues makes the same argument as Davies in regards to infrastructure, but also that increased population via immigration will make health and educational services worse off. Other articles from Independent Australia include “[Morrison and Shorten’s Big Australia: The overpopulation problem](https://independentaustralia.net/politics/politics-display/morrison-and-shortens-big-australia-the-overpopulation-problem,12584)” by Stephen Saunders in April 2019 and “[The endless growth paradigm](https://independentaustralia.net/politics/politics-display/the-endless-growth-paradigm-,13039)” by Michael Bayliss in August 2019.

Meanjin, New Matilda and Independent Australia are all nominally left-of-centre, yet these pieces, among others, are some of the most explicit right-wing propaganda outside of Murdoch-owned right-wing media. By framing the argument as an environmental one—an issue often associated with the left—the authors are able to pass off xenophobic nationalism as a progressive quality. Something many of the authors of the above pieces also share is a desire to not talk about race or ethnicity when making their eco-fascist arguments, and a sense that those who do talk about race when disagreeing with their anti-immigrant rhetoric are simply “playing the race card” so to speak. This is because they know that if they allow their arguments to be historically contextualised and judged based on the material impact they would cause, they would correctly be viewed as an incredibly racist yet unsurprising continuation of the arguments that formed the basis for the White Australia Policy. Nationalism and xenophobia will always be the tools of fascism, even when employed for ostensibly environmental reasons.

Larger, more centrist platforms, such as the ABC and Fairfax Media, have also done their share of fear-mongering. Within the last few years, so many articles have been written which compare the density of Australian cities to that foreign cities that it has become its own genre. The whole point of these articles is to argue that Australian cities are losing their “liveability” and quickly devolving into particular foreign cities that are heavily implied to be bad. Examples of this are the October 2018 ABC article titled [“Melbourne’s Population Explosion threatens to create a ‘Bangkok situation’”](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-10-15/melbourne-will-be-australias-biggest-city-which-party-has-policy/10358988), or the 2014 article in The Guardian titled [“Melbourne’s housing density more extreme than Hong Kong, council says”](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/11/melbournes-housing-density-more-extreme-than-hong-kong-council-says) What's more, many of these articles get basic statistics wrong in a way which makes Australian cities look far denser than they are. A [story in The Age](https://www.theage.com.au/politics/victoria/population-pressure-a-fast-growing-concern-for-victorian-voters-20180614-p4zlh5.html) claimed that “[Melbourne CBD] has reached a level of density far greater than NYC”. While this is technically true, this is comparing the Melbourne’s CBD to the entirety of New York City, which is 300 times larger and includes many residential neighbourhoods. A more honest comparison would be to compare the CBD to Manhattan, which is far denser than the CBD. An even more honest comparison would be to compare it to Lower Manhattan, which is denser still. Other examples of misusing statistics in the same way by the Sydney Morning Herald were exposed in a [Crikey article by Alan Davies](https://blogs.crikey.com.au/theurbanist/2017/04/04/sydney-new-new-york/). Even ArchitectureAU, an Australian architecture magazine, published an article titled [“Green Square density to exceed Hong Kong’s”](https://architectureau.com/articles/green-square-density-to-near-hong-kongs/), which similarly takes the density of 2.7 square kilometre development in Sydney and compares it to the entirety of Hong Kong, which is more than 1000 times larger. Not all of these articles explicitly blame immigration for increased density and strain on infrastructure, but they all attempt to create a sense of fear of population growth—often using false statistics—and an urgency to do something about it.

Outside of the media already discussed, there will, of course, always the explicitly right-wing rhetoric found in Murdoch-owned media which doesn’t even attempt to hide it’s ethnonationalism. A proper critique would take a whole book, but its influence should not be overlooked. However, many people who don’t view themselves as conservative already know this about the right-wing media, and the fact that eco-fascist and xenophobic ideas have permeated a wider swathe of the centrist and left publications means it begins to seem like the sensible default view regardless of your political orientation, as opposed to the explicitly right-wing rhetoric it is.

This is not to say that anyone who has concerns about density, building design, environmental quality, congestion or infrastructure strain is a xenophobe, these are actual issues. But if the answer to all of these problems—as is often portrayed in Australian media—is to stop or reduce immigration as opposed to drastically improving public transport, getting developer influence out of urban planning, building social housing or strengthening environmental regulations, then it seems that the motive of these arguments is not to improve these aspects of society and the environment, but simply to reduce or eliminate immigration. Awareness of this tactic is essential for those who want to effectively fight anti-immigrant propaganda in Australia.
