---
title: Yellow Peril Today
date: 2020-02-14
published: true
author: Dan Henri
tags: ['Politics', 'Immigration', 'Racism']
cover_image: ./images/3_yellow-peril-today.jpg
canonical_url: false
description: Anti-Chinese racism is being used by the political and media classes in the west in order to increase nationalist sentiment and distract from the material issues which affect the working class.
---

In 2018, the book _Silent Invasion: China’s Influence in Australia_ was released. It contains uncited estimations of how many Chinese-Australians are loyal to Beijing, calls Chinese students in Australia “Brainwashed from birth”, claims that many ethnically Chinese people who were allowed to stay in Australia after the Tiananmen Square Protests have become agents of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), proposes residency and citizenship restrictions for Chinese people based on ethnicity and political leanings, and generally makes the argument that anyone in Australia with Chinese heritage is potentially working covertly as part of a “fifth column” operation for the CCP. The blatant Yellow Peril and race-essentialism received some pushback in the mainstream media. However, the author — think-tank founder and professor Clive Hamilton — was also invited to do the rounds on the pseudo-intellectual, think-tank sponsored conference circuit and given an [uncritical write-up](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-02-22/book-reveals-extent-of-chinese-influence-in-australia/9464692) in Australia’s public broadcaster, the ABC. The book was even considered to be published by parliament in order to ensure its protection, while Hamilton himself spoke to a [US congressional committee](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2018/apr/27/china-waging-psychological-warfare-against-australia-us-congress-told) about the threat of China. It quickly became a “very serious book” which was regularly discussed on political talk shows.

Hamilton may try to sell his argument as having nothing to do with race, and he may moan that he is “offended” when former Australian Race Discrimination Commissioner Tim Soutphommasane correctly said _Silent Invasion _“recalls old fears about yellow hordes overwhelming vulnerable white Australia”, but Hamilton’s arguments would not seem out of place at all among the 19th century ruling class who advocated for and implemented the series of laws known as the White Australia Policy. For comparison, in arguing for restrictions on Chinese immigration, member of the Queensland Legislative Council William Yaldwyn stated the following:

_“We were near neighbours to a teeming mass of Chinese;—nearly 400,000,000 of them were separated from us by a narrow stretch of placid ocean. It was a stern struggle for existence in that closely packed country, and the advantages possessed by a rich and sparsely inhabited colony like Queensland must be only too apparent to them. The peaceful invasion had begun; it was idle to think it would cease.”_

This is similar to Hamilton’s argument that many of the Chinese people allowed to stay after Tiananmen Square were merely “economic migrants”, who by implication do not deserve the privilege of living in Australia. Meanwhile, the terms “peaceful invasion” could have easily been the title of Hamilton’s book (although _Silent Invasion_ is probably more sinister-sounding). The main difference is that Hamilton goes through a lot of effort to show that Chinese people are inherently disloyal and untrustworthy and uses that as his reasoning for proposing restrictions on Chinese immigration, whereas his progenitors assume white Australians already have this view.

While anti-Chinese propaganda is particularly bad in Australia, it is far from the only country where it is occuring. The United States introduced heavy restrictions on Chinese graduate student visas in 2018 and have started refusing Chinese student visa applications at a much higher rate. In Vancouver, Canada, as well as Melbourne and Sydney in Australia and Auckland in New Zealand, the media eagerly racializes the cause those cities’ high housing costs, blaming Chinese investors and immigrants, often with very little to no actual evidence. New Zealand has implemented a near-total ban on non-permanent residents and non-citizens buying property, while nearly every media story about this law points to Chinese buyers pricing “locals” out of the market. 

This all forms the narrative that your country (if it is US-aligned and particularly if it is in the Pacific region) and way of life are in danger, and that danger does not necessarily just come from potential military actions of the Chinese state, but from regular Chinese people in your country, who are part of an effort to slowly take over. As the title of Hamilton’s book says, a silent invasion.

The obvious outcome of this is that it is now acceptable to openly question a Chinese person’s loyalty to the state, and to use a presupposed disloyalty as a way to discriminate against Chinese people. This all has the effect of dividing the working class along racial lines and distracting from many of these countries’ austerity policies being implemented. For a glaring example of this just look to New Zealand where in 2017 where the now Deputy Prime Minister, Winston Peters, attacked two reporters for a story they did which contradicted the overarching narrative that New Zealand is being overrun by people from Asia and China in particular. He specifically attacked the reporters as “Asian immigrants” writing “propaganda”. He has also stated that that “two Wongs don’t make a white” when discussing Chinese influence in New Zealand and had previously called New Zealand “the last Asian colony”.

It was in this environment that the New Zealand Prime Minister, Jacinda Ardern — who has excellent PR and is generally viewed as being very progressive — came into power on the promise of cutting immigration [nearly in half](https://www.stuff.co.nz/national/politics/98075476/jacinda-ardern-indicates-big-immigration-cuts-coming-warns-about-economy). Her party, Labour, say on their website that they are going to be “taking a breather” on immigration, which they link to high housing prices and infrastructure costs. The Wall Street Journal even compared her to Trump on immigration, to which she responded that she was [“infuriated” by the comparison](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/apr/18/jacinda-ardern-infuriated-with-comparisons-to-donald-trump), and that New Zealand was a nation of immigrants — as if the difference between fascist and progressive policy is simply the tone in which it’s discussed, or the identity of the person implementing it. Ardern has managed to put a young, progressive face on blatant racism, all while getting [glowing](https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2018/jun/29/jacinda-ardern-is-the-very-hero-the-global-left-needs-right-now) [write-ups](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/19/opinion/jacinda-ardern-new-zealand.html) in mainstream publications from around the world. Meanwhile, the number of people on the public housing waitlist in New Zealand has [doubled](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/jan/16/new-zealands-waiting-list-for-state-housing-hits-record-high) since Ardern’s election, while the government has abandoned its inadequate, neoliberal, “affordable housing” policy, which produced [$650,000 homes](https://www.interest.co.nz/news/93736/ardern-admits-650000-three-bedroom-kiwibuild-home-will-still-be-unaffordable-too-many), and did nothing for renters.

By casting Chinese people as a threat to both national security and national culture, the US, Australian, New Zealand, and other governments are creating the conditions in which Chinese people can be blamed for unaffordable housing while the government cuts funding to public housing, they can be blamed for overcrowded trains and buses while the government hasn’t increased public transportation funding in years. Governments can more easily enact policies which benefit the rich at the expense of the working class when people have been conditioned to blame Chinese immigrants for the outcomes of these policies. It also helps to have sown widespread anti-China sentiment in case of any future conflicts or proxy-wars with the world’s second largest economy. 

Apart from distracting from government failures and working class exploitation, the conditions produced by this Yellow Peril obviously also affect people of Chinese ethnicity (and Asian people more generally) who live in western countries via racism. In Australia, 55 percent of East Asian language speakers have experience housing discrimination, as opposed to 19 percent of English-only speakers, according to one [study](https://theconversation.com/asians-out-not-in-this-suburb-not-in-this-apartment-103919). Monash University Student Union in Melbourne, Australia attempted to make a last minute change to their election rules in order to make international students ineligible to run once it became clear that Australian students would be outnumbered by international Chinese students if the union election where to go through. FBI statistics show that hate crimes against Asian-Pacific Americans had [increased by 20 percent](https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/news/hate-crimes-reported-to-fbi-jumped-17-percent-in-2017) from 2016 to 2017 (and had increased even more for Latino, Arab, and Native Americans). There was a high profile incident where two Duke University Professors asked the head of a masters program for the names of two Chinese students in order to make sure that they did not get jobs or internships with them after graduation. The Chinese students’ offence? The professors happened to overhear the students speaking in Chinese around campus. 

The Western left should stand against anti-China government propaganda and firmly with the international working class Chinese diaspora and anyone affected by anti-Chinese and anti-Asian racism, as well as the working class in China itself. As history has shown time and time again, the working class can only exert its power for the good of all when it rejects divisive, racist rhetoric. And while western propagandists such as Hamilton may tell you that the Chinese are brainwashed hyper-nationalists, the reality is that working class dissent and industrial action is flourishing in China, with 1,384 recorded strikes in 2019 according to the China Labour Bulletin, although the real number is likely much higher. This dissent provides a real opportunity for leftists elsewhere to show solidarity with the working class in China and in turn reject the Yellow Peril narratives and racism being pushed by western governments and media at home. The ability of states to oppress their working class relies in part on people accepting the framework of nations and nationalities, and that these should have any impact on how we organize ourselves. The working class has no borders, and when we act like it we win.
