---
title: The Myth of "The World's Most Successful Multicultural Country"
date: 2019-12-10
published: true
tags: ['Politics','Immigration', 'Australia']
cover_image: 
canonical_url: false
description: "Australian political and media elites like to talk up the country's multicultural values, but a closer look reveals this to serve as a soothing distraction for liberal-minded citizens from the reality of the immigration system"
---

In recent years, the Australian political establishment has taken to calling Australia “The most successful multicultural country in the world”. The two most recent prime ministers have employed the phrase often, as have [think-tanks](https://mckellinstitute.org.au/research/articles/why-australia-is-the-worlds-most-successful-multicultural-society/), it is even the first line in the Australian Government’s [“multicultural statement”](https://www.homeaffairs.gov.au/about-us/our-portfolios/multicultural-affairs/about-multicultural-affairs/our-statement). At face value, it is hard to argue that Australia is not, if not the most, at least a quite successful multicultural country. The statistics, which the Australian political establishment often cites, can seem quite impressive: In 2018, [29% of the population](https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/3412.0Main%20Features22017-18?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=3412.0&issue=2017-18&num=&view=) of Australia were immigrants, and roughly half of the population was either born somewhere else, or have a least one parent who was. This seems to be indicative of highly welcoming country.

But behind these basic demographic statistics trotted out by politicians, there is a complex system of policies and informal labor structures which completely undermine these saccharine sentiments. This system all but ensures that the vast majority of immigrants to Australia will never be allowed to stay permanently, and punishes them for trying, while also encouraging illegal wage exploitation. In other words, the Australian political and business establishment are happy to welcome immigrants, exploit their labor for a few years, and then force them out of the country.

Anything more than a cursory look and it becomes obvious that “the most successful multicultural country in the world” is not employed as a way of celebrating Australian diversity, but of obfuscating the system that exploits immigrant labor and lives. Take the 2016 op-ed in the Sydney Morning Herald written by Malcolm Turnbull, the then-Prime Minister, titled “[The truth is our successful multicultural society is built on secure borders](https://www.smh.com.au/opinion/the-truth-is-our-successful-multicultural-society-is-built-on-secure-borders-20160519-goz3ro.html)”, or the current Liberal Party Government’s “[Plan to Back our Multicultural Communities](https://www.liberal.org.au/our-plan-back-our-multicultural-communities)” which states it will “Keep Australians safe and our borders secure”, to see this type of diversity-washing clearly on display. However, the parts of this system that actually affect the material well-being of immigrants, with the exception of Australia’s [brutal system of offshore migrant concentration camps](https://www.scmp.com/magazines/post-magazine/long-reads/article/2143663/human-cost-australias-offshore-detention-centres), generally have very little salience in mainstream Australian political discourse.


# Permanently Temporary

Legally, Australia divides its immigrant population into two broad categories: temporary and permanent. Those with permanent visas are permanent residents. They can stay as long as they want in Australia (although are still subject to deportation), and have many of the same rights that citizens do. Those with temporary visas, known as temporary migrants, are heavily restricted in a myriad of ways depending on their specific visa. The thing nearly all temporary migrants have in common is the fact that there is an official end date to their legal residency in Australia. 

Temporary visas are non-renewable, and importantly, they generally do not provide a direct path to permanent residency or citizenship; legally, it is expected that these people simply leave when their visa expires. This means that a temporary migrant who builds a life in the time they are legally allowed to be in Australia—which could be for years—is often still exactly as ineligible for a permanent visa as they were before they came to the country. On the chance that they have become eligible, say through finding a partner with permanent residency or citizenship, or obtaining the relevant combination of work experience and a university degree the government is seeking, they first have to be able to afford some of the highest visa fees in the world to even be able to apply. If they can’t afford it, or more likely, if they aren’t eligible in the first place, the only thing to do is leave the country or apply for a different temporary visa. 

For an example of this, say someone comes in on a 2 year working holiday visa, changes to a 4 year student visa to go to university, after which they change to a 2 year post-study work visa in order to be able to work. This person has now spent 8 years living in Australia and may have run out of options for staying in the country. They could try for a different work visa, or go back to school and get a student visa, but that would only delay being forced to leave. Even if they had planned ahead and got a degree and work experience in a field on the government’s skill-shortages list in order to apply for a permanent visa down the road, there is no guarantee that that their skill will be on the list when they apply as it changes yearly, often based on political pressure. The outcome of this temporary visa system is that people without citizenship or permanent residency in Australia are in a constant state of precarity. 

This precarity is the intentional outcome of Australia’s immigration system and other government policies, and any attempts by immigrants to put down roots are actively punished. If an immigrant on a temporary visa has a child, not only is that child also on a temporary visa thanks to lack of birthright citizenship laws, but the cost to send them to public school could be anywhere in the ballpark of 5,000 to over 15,000 AUD per child depending on the state, type of visa, and age of the child. If that child has a disability, this makes them and their family more vulnerable to deportation as Australia has had a blatantly eugenicist policy since 1994 which effectively denies visas to children with disabilities on the basis that they would be a drain on the state.

These policies inflict drastic harm on immigrant families in Australia. The lack of birthright citizenship laws result in [children and their families being imprisoned for years](https://www.hometobilo.com/), sometimes [since birth](https://www.smh.com.au/national/un-group-urges-release-of-mother-and-baby-from-immigration-detention-20190601-p51th6.html), as they are subject to the same mandatory detention laws that adults are. The public school fees are far too high for someone making the [Australian median wage of 34,400 AUD per year](https://quickstats.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2016/quickstat/036) in 2016, which means either homeschooling your child or, more likely, leaving the country. The eugenics-based policy has led to [case](https://www.9news.com.au/national/wa-toddler-visa-rejected-by-government-disability-care-costs-too-expensive-health-news-australia/902b5411-5362-4767-84da-a71113f71341) after [case](https://www.sbs.com.au/yourlanguage/urdu/en/article/2019/06/06/better-get-death-sentence-pakistani-family-faces-deportation-over-disability) of families, including permanent residents, [at risk of being deported](https://www.sbs.com.au/news/more-than-15-families-a-year-face-deportation-because-of-one-relative-s-disabilities). The result of all of these practices is an immigration system in which non-citizens can almost never feel truly off-the-hook. At any moment their seemingly solid plan could crumble and leave them and their family scrambling. This also creates the conditions for labor exploitation.


# Wage Theft

While dealing with the constant, government-enforced lifestyle of precarity, immigrants also have to deal with some of the worst working conditions in Australia. While wage-theft affects many low-wage workers in Australia, it is especially bad for immigrants. A 2018 study found that a third of immigrant workers on temporary visas made [less than half](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2018/oct/29/a-third-of-australias-foreign-workers-paid-less-than-half-minimum-wage-study) of the legal minimum wage, while the majority suffered some form of wage-theft. 

Many industries are dependent on the severe exploitation of immigrant workers, but the Australian farming industry in particular has been shaped by government and business to heavily rely on underpaid immigrant labor, which often consists of undocumented workers and workers on Working Holiday visas. Immigrants on Working Holiday visas—almost always euphemistically referred to as “backpackers” by the mainstream press—are required to do three months of farm work to renew their visa. This creates a situation where exploitation by employers is rife, as they take advantage of the fact that workers risk deportation if they don’t complete this labor. Even if these workers are “lucky” enough to be paid the legal minimum wage, the Australian Government will withhold [15-32.5%](https://www.ato.gov.au/Individuals/International-tax-for-individuals/Coming-to-Australia/Working-holiday-makers/) of their taxes from the first dollar they make, as they specifically are not eligible for the tax-free threshold. 

Even more vulnerable than immigrants on Working Holiday visas are undocumented workers, who are at the highest risk of detention and deportation, and subsequently, severe exploitation, as they have no legal right to be in the country. Australian media coverage and government investigations have compared the situation of undocumented farm workers to slavery. Their wages are often extremely low or nonexistent, and they are forced to stay in cramped conditions while working long hours in grueling conditions. And because of Australia’s mandatory immigration detention laws, if they are ever discovered by Australia’s immigration enforcement agency—Border Force—or the police, who work hand in glove with the Border Force, they will be put in indefinite detention an eventually deported. Coverage of this issue in the Australian media is often biased towards the employers, framing it as a case of farmers having no choice but to brutally exploit workers, even focussing on the potential loss of crop yield instead of the material conditions of the workers themselves. Likewise, government and industry responses have completely ignored the conditions of the undocumented workers, opting to focuss on small tweaks to the visa system. Undocumented immigrants in Australia unfortunately do not have the same level of visibility or political power as in some other countries such as the US, where immigration activists have forced the topic into the public sphere. There are signs may be changing though, as a major national union is making the radical [call for amnesty](https://www.nuw.org.au/fair-food-australia/our-campaign) for undocumented farm workers.

The illegal exploitation of immigrant workers’ labor does not need to take place. The Australian government has purposely created a system which incentivizes these conditions via a system of mandatory serfdom for Working Holiday visa holders, and the threat of indefinite detention for the undocumented. The farming industry is happy to take advantage of the situation, indeed, that’s the whole point of the system; artificially cheap labor to prop up an uncompetitive industry on the backs of exploited workers. The system is perpetuated by the mainstream media organizations like the public broadcaster the ABC, who have written stories with headlines such as  _Border Force crackdown on illegal foreign workers leaves Victorian farmers struggling to find pickers_, which portrays the Border Force raids and imprisonment of workers as more of an obstacle to agricultural production than a human rights issue, as well as by the Border Force, who play a key role in ensuring that workers are in too precarious a position to easily organize and demand higher wages.


# Detention

The lynchpin behind many of these anti-immigrant policies in Australia is the policy of mandatory and indefinite detention of any immigrant found to be in breach of immigration law. And in this case, indefinite really means indefinite. The UN has recently publicly called on Australia to release a disabled Tamil refugee who has been imprisoned by the Australian government for nine years and is currently at Villawood Immigration Detention Centre in Sydney. And sickeningly, there is currently one child, 16 month-old Isabella, who has spent her whole life imprisoned by the government in the Melbourne Immigration Transit Centre, and another, two year-old Tharunicaa, who has spent more than half of her life in detention.

The conditions and treatment in these prison camps are abhorrent. With numerous disturbing incidents having occurred. Isabella has been to the hospital with the flu after weeks of her mother’s complaints about her fever had been ignored. The only reason she ended up getting medical care in the first place was because her mother’s immigration lawyer called an ambulance. In early July, Tharunicaa had a whiteboard fall on her head, for five hours she received no medical care despite vomiting twice and her face swelling during this period. A few weeks later, the same child had all of her teeth surgically removed. They were too rotten for her to eat solid food with—a result of a lack of both adequate sunlight and nutrition according to advocates. A 23 year old man died under mysterious circumstances after being imprisoned for 2 years. Another man, who has been imprisoned for seven years, sewed his lips together after going on a hunger-strike for two weeks. All of these incidents occurred within the month of July at a single detention center in Melbourne. In general, deaths, hunger-strikes, riots, and lip-suturing have been familiar occurrences in Australian immigration prisons. And this is to say nothing of Australia’s “offshore” immigration prisons, which have been specifically set up to imprison those who arrive in Australia by boat, usually to claim asylum. These prisons have been home of many of the worst human rights abuses, and the prisoners are specifically barred from ever settling in Australia.Since this article was originally written, Tharunicaa, along with her sister and parents have been transferred to Christmas Island; one of the offshore immigration prisons.

These are the situations immigrants face if they are found to be in violation of immigration law. With the threat of being imprisoned for potentially the better half of a decade in a place where people sew their lips together and children have their teeth cut out, it’s no wonder that immigrants in Australia are able to be exploited to such a degree. 

It should be obvious that when the political elite say that a country in which non-citizens are systematically stolen from, imprisoned, deported, and exploited is the pinnacle of what multiculturalism can be, they are telling a blatant lie which serves to placate the country’s more liberal-minded citizens and to obfuscate the actual material conditions of immigrants with meaningless platitudes. Additionally, this vapid pride in an unexamined, surface-level multiculturalism is seen as something which needs to be protected, and perversely is used as an excuse to crack down even more on non-citizens, as if to say “we can only have all these wonderful immigrants by treating our immigrants terribly”.

These conditions for immigrants, especially those in detention, are not new. And in the past, Australians have shown radical solidarity with immigrants in response. In 2002, activists gathered at the now decommissioned Woomera immigration prison—a camp in a remote desert area north of Adelaide known for its suicide attempts and hunger strikes—and using the weight of their own bodies brought down a razorwire fence around the compound, while the prisoners used a metal pole to pry free a post in the compound wall. 35 people were freed that day; an incredible feat.

It is that radical solidarity that is needed today to break through the system created by the state, business, and the media. A system that deports families because their children have disabilities, that keeps public school financially out of reach for many immigrants, that allows undocumented workers to make little to nothing, and that lets the teeth of a two year old rot before cutting them out. Both of the two major parties have both long presided over these abuses and have done next to nothing to even mitigate the situation. Vapid appeals to liberalism must be rejected and answered with action.